
There are four main components of a genetic association or prediction dataset, the individuals, genotypes, phenotypes, and covariates.  

Individuals

An individual has a measured value (a phenotype, also known as a y-value).  

A data set has information about multiple individuals; this set is called a population. 
 
Individuals can be measured more than once, either as clones (so the measurements are independent) or sometimes across time (multivariate y, not independent).   In crops the individuals can be grouped into plots, so they are spatially adjacent and not truly independent.

At least some of the individuals will have genotypes.  Genotypes are multivariate and each one of the list of genotypes within an individual has an ID.  For association analysis, all the individuals have genotypes and phenotypes.  For prediction analysis, all individuals have genotypes, some have phenotypes, and we try to predict the unknown phenotype using the genotype features.

Individuals often have covariates.  Covariates can be fixed or measured values.  Covariates are usually present in more than on individual in a population.  

Some identifiers for individuals (in other words, the file headers) include line, recombinant inbred line (RIL), inbred, hybrid, animal….



Genotypes

These are inherent features of individuals.  They can differ between different individuals, and differences (i.e. variance) in a population is necessary to do an association analysis. 

The most common genotype feature is a single nucleotide polymorphism, or SNP.  The SNP will have a unique ID (usually alphanumeric, often with special characters) and a value that differs in different individuals.  The different values are called SNP states or SNP alleles.  The word allele refers to any fundamental value of the DNA string sequence; when we say SNP-allele we are referring to one unit within the DNA string (i.e., single nucleotide).  The word allele can also be applied to other types of DNA features that are not necessarily single nucleotides.

SNPs have values drawn from the DNA letters G,A,T,C.  Depending on the type of individual being studied, these values can be single letters that come in only two types—in this case, they are often given binary designations such as 1,0 or A,B or 1,2 to make analysis easier.  It is common to recode these as needed for specific data analyses.  In other types of individuals, there are four possible SNP states and it’s also possible to be mixed-state (for example, to be GG or GC or CC).  These are also sometimes recoded with numerical keys such as 1,2,3.  Sadly, there is no single standard for formats or for coding look-up-tables.  Quite a bit of digging through metadata and documentation can be required to get the specifics for a data set.  It is also common for there to be missing values, which again do not have a standard designation—hyphens and “NA” are the most common designators.  

Genotype data files are arranged with the individuals in rows and the SNP_ID in column headers then the SNP-state for that individual in each cell, or with these rows and columns exchanged.  This can generate large flat files, as we often have tens to hundreds of thousands of SNPs per individual.  A better format would be hdf5, but it is not in common use yet.

SNP-states are often treated as fixed factors in statistical analyses, though since they are measured by people or instruments it would be better to allow for potential errors within them.  

Genotypes are a physical feature (in the DNA of the individual) and they have spatial structure.  The most obvious structure is the tight correlation of physically adjacent alleles.  For historical reasons this is often called linkage disequilibrium (LD). In many cases we see very strong correlations between physically adjacent SNP-states, even perfect correlation.  We sometimes group these physically correlated SNPs into one feature called a haplotype block.  This spatial structure generates lots of complexity for statistical analysis, as P-values must be adjusted correctly.

In some cases we have a variable for the physical distance, called the map distance or with a chromosome-distance value (e.g. chr3 11223344 Mb). The map distance is generated by a mapping algorithm with large errors for correlated markers, so the distance indicators are not reliably ordered down the rows; the physical distance can be more reliable in some cases but changes in order can occur over time (with different genome builds) or across populations.  This can seriously complicate statistical analysis if the method does not account for the uncertainty of the order—this problem has led to use of scan statistics and haplotype-block-based analyses.  If the association method requires a map position variate and you don’t have it, you can use an incrementing row number as a crude approximation to the map distance.  

There can also be long-distance higher-order correlations that occur due to sampling or biological constraints.  We are interested in these when they are biological, but it is hard to separate sampling limitations from true signal.  For more about this, you can read about epistasis at . 


Covariates

These are any labels that occur in a population of individuals. There are two main types, what I will call inherent covariates (such as male/female) and environmental covariates (measured values specific to particular settings where the individuals were measured).  

Inherent covariates are usually provided for each individual, sometimes as a separate data table and sometimes included in the phenotype data file.

Populations can have skewed distributions of genotype values that confound statistical analysis, so we normally include a population covariate in our analyses.  This can be a separately generated relatedness matrix (i.e. down weighting of oversampled genotypes that happen to occur frequently in the population set).  This is often generated as needed as part of an association analysis app.  

Environmental covariates are of increasing interest.  These can range from fields in medical records to weather variates such as air temperature and wind speed.  

We usually want to account for covariates, in other words to get a covariate-specific estimate of the importance of a genotype feature on a measured phenotype.  This is an active area of research, and as yet most analyses require customization. 


Phenotypes


These are the measured y values for individuals.  These are also called ‘traits’ and sometimes we use descriptors like ‘disease’.  

The usual measurement issues apply, such as missing values and unclear data processing steps used to generate the values.  It is always preferable to have the ‘code map’ for these measured data (see ).  



